Let's summarize some of the points that we’ve
talked about in this lecture.
Today we take for granted that we can use
GPS to determine our position anywhere on
the surface of the planet, but it is a relatively
recent technology. It only became operational
in 1994, and only became available at reasonable
accuracy for the general public in the year 2000.
Before the advent of GPS, navigating precisely
on the surface of the planet or in outer space
was very very difficult, and the technology
that was used was called inertial navigation,
and that involved measuring the acceleration
and angular velocity of a vehicle, and integrating
that over time to determine the position.
The key components of an Inertial Navigation
System are: an inertial measurement unit;
which contains the sensors that measure acceleration,
magnetic field, and angular velocity, and
what’s called dead reckoning software; that
takes those signals and integrates them over
time to continually update the pose of the
vehicle.
At a simplistic level we can consider that
an accelerometer is a mass on a spring inside
a little box. If we do the algebra we can
show that the extension of the spring is linearly
proportional to the acceleration of the device
and the gravitational acceleration. An accelerometer
at rest on earth indicates an acceleration
of 1g in the vertical or upward direction.
This is a little bit counter-intuitive, because
when we drop something it is going to accelerate
in the downward direction. The accelerometer
at rest measures 1g upwards. And this is a
consequence of the equivalence principle.
An accelerometer on the surface of the earth
or an accelerometer mounted in a rocket accelerating
upwards at 1g, both of them indicate an acceleration
of 1g.
Many devices, for example my phone, contain
three accelerometers which measure acceleration
in the x, y and z directions of a coordinate
frame B attached to my phone. I can use the
components of acceleration measured in the
phone in coordinate frame B to determine the
roll and pitch of the phone with respect to
the blue coordinate frame 0.
The earth contains a gigantic but fairly weak
magnet, but the poles of that magnet are not
constant. They change with time. A compass
has a needle which points towards the north
magnetic pole, but the north magnetic pole
is different to the north geographic pole.
At any particular point on the surface of
the earth we can establish a right-handed
coordinate frame where one axis points towards
the north geographic pole, another axis points
vertically downwards towards the centre of
the planet, and the other axis points in the
geographic east direction. The earth’s magnetic
field vector is shown here by a red arrow,
and it can be described with respect to this
coordinate frame by two angles. Magnetic declination
is the difference between two directions;
the direction of true north and the direction
of magnetic north - the direction that the
compass points in. The other angle is magnetic
inclination, and that’s the angle that the
magnetic field vector makes with respect to
a local horizontal surface. It’s also referred
to as magnetic dip.
In order to determine the yaw angle - that’s
the direction that the body is facing with
respect to magnetic north - we need to combine
information from two sensors. We determine
the roll and pitch angle of the body using
the accelerometers, and then we use the components
of the magnetic field sensed onboard the body,
combine that with what we know about the local
magnetic inclination angle, and the local
magnetic field strength to determine the yaw
angle.
A spinning disc has some interesting dynamic
properties. One of these is that we can use
it to convert an angular velocity - omega
- about the blue axis, into a torque - tau
- about the red axis.
We can measure that torque by measuring the
forces that are exerted on the axle that supports
the rotating disc. If we know the parameters
such as the rotational inertia of the disc
and the rotational velocity of the disc, then
we can determine omega, the rotational velocity
of this gyroscopic sensor.
Interestingly there are biological equivalents
of accelerometers and gyroscopes in our bodies.
In each of our ears we have two accelerometers
and three gyroscopes which measure the motion
of our body, and that’s integrated with
visual information in our brain to understand
how we are moving with respect to the world.
Finally we looked at how to compute the derivative
of a rotation matrix. It’s the product of
two matrices: it’s a skew-symmetric matrix
multiplied by the original rotation matrix.
The skew-symmetric matrix is computed on the
angular velocity of the body; that’s the
vector L about which the body is instantaneously
rotating multiplied by the rate of rotation
about that axis.
The skew-symmetric matrix has got a number
of interesting properties. In particular it’s
singular. That is, its determinate is always
equal to 0, and its transpose is the negative
value of itself. In the case of three dimensions,
as shown here, we can clearly see a zero diagonal,
and the fact that the matrix only contains
three unique elements, x, y and z, Each of
which appear once with a positive sign, and
once with a negative sign.